Okay, let's try a volume check.
Okay, this is Ron Shorn, and I'm interviewing Jack
Brandt, and for the record, give your full name. My
entire full name? John Conrad Brandt, Jr. Okay,
and when were you born? I was born on... Well,
that's actually a tricky question. but it will
give you insight into how my life has gone. I was
actually born on August 7th, 1934. Both my mother
and father agreed that I was born on August 7th,
1934. However, the city of St. Louis says I was born
on August 8th, 1934. So it turns out I ran afoul of
bureaucracy essentially on square one and have
been running afoul of bureaucracies ever since.
How did you get interested in astronomy?
You know, that is really hard to say, but I can, it's
the kind of thing that I think is very natural to
people. But the specific thing that I can remember
is writing a paper very early in my college career
on the determination of the speed of light by Ole
Romer and whoever worked with him from the
satellites of Jupiter. And I was impressed that
such a basically simple approach to a fairly
fundamental observation could yield, ballpark,
the correct results. And this idea of being able to
use your wits to determine what's going on in a
cosmic sense appealed to me. And I guess it was
downhill from there on. Where did you get your
undergraduate degree and when? Undergraduate
degree at Washington University in St. Louis in
1956. And what was your major? Mathematics. And
then where did you go to grad school? I went to grad
school twice. The first time was at the University
of Chicago. 56 to 60 when I got a degree, PhD, in
astronomy. And then due to various malfeasances
of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration from 1981 to 1983, I went to
graduate school at Loyola College in Baltimore
and obtained a Master of Business
Administration.
Who was your thesis advisor? What was your thesis
advisor? My thesis was on different ways of
producing lime and alpha radiation in the solar
system. This included some planets and And what
was then called the interplanetary medium, the
solar wind hadn't actually been fully invented
yet. It was around, but not used. And my thesis
advisor was Joseph Chamberlain. How did you get
interested in that field? Did they pick you, or did
you go around and pick something else? It was sort
of a little bit of both. When I first went to Yerkes,
I was, of course, taking courses. And I had a
one-year research assistantship on the
astrometry project that was being run by Kai
Strand at the time. And I quickly determined that I
was not all that interested in astrometry. And
this guy named Joe Chamberlain seemed to be doing
interesting physics in the atmospheres of
planets, and he was also working on solar wind
theory at the time. The juncture was natural and I
think he's been very productive.
Where did you go after you got your PhD? The first
year after the PhD I spent, I was a something called
an NSF cooperative.
Cooperative, oh boy, it's been a long time. but
some kind of postdoctoral fellowship that
involved the postdoctoral institution
contributing resources and NSF paid the salary.
And that was essentially late 60 to late 61 at Mount
Wilson and Palomar, literally on 813 Santa
Barbara Street. And where'd you go from there? And
I came to Berkeley. and I stayed here a year and a
half and then I went to Kitt Peak in early 63 and
stayed there for three years and then in 66 I went to
the Goddard Institute for Space Studies and
stayed there about a year and they were then trying
to get people to go to Goddard and run things so I
started out in the solar physics branch in 1967 as I
think Ed was the technical title, and then I was
made chief of the Laboratory for Solar Physics,
and that evolved and amalgamated, and for about
the last 10 years at Goddard, which ended in 87, so
from 77 to 87, I was chief of the Laboratory for
Astronomy and Solar Physics.
And then I went to the University of Colorado,
where I am senior research associate and
professor, paren, attendant rank, close paren.
I'm just, I'm not making this up. I'll give you my
card if you don't believe it. Of astrophysical,
planetary, and atmospheric sciences. We require
documentation for that, so...
Okay, do you consider yourself an astronomer?
Yeah. And do you consider yourself a solar system
astronomer? A what? A solar system or planetary
astronomer or just plain astronomer? I consider
both. Okay. Usually the world, for reasons which
are not sound, describes all astronomers into
solar system people and the equivalent of
astrophysicists. I am both. Back
in the early 60s, did you feel looked down upon by
real quote-unquote astronomers? Well, I'm
absolutely sure that real astronomers tried to
look down on me, but I didn't let them. And I'm being
slightly serious. for quite some time, have
chosen the things to work on that I was interested
in for what I perceived to be their intrinsic merit
and interest to me. And if somebody else doesn't
think that's important, that's, in my personal
opinion, their problem. Do you think that real
astronomers look down on planetary anything
closer in the light year, back in the 60s? And do
they do it now? Well, they certainly did in the 60s.
But this is simply a mental aberration that should
not be unduly dignified. There is a huge tendency
in astronomy for anybody working in any field to
regard anything that that person is not
personally working on as unimportant. And I think
it far transcends the astrophysicists looking
down on the solar system people and you can even
take it farther and then you get into the
astrophysicists, the people that work on
cosmology and quasars look down on the stellar
people. And it's sort of another form of prejudice
in our society that shouldn't be unduly
dignified. What was astronomy and planetary
astronomy like when you got started as opposed to
today? I don't know about as opposed to today. We
were just starting to get into missions to
planets, which, of course, were very exciting.
A lot of the work that I did first with Joe
Chamberlain with myself was some of the first work
done on, for example, Lyman Alpha from the
planets. And half of my astronomer friends didn't
know what Lyman Alpha was, which I found somewhat
amusing. But I'm sorry, I tilted it back at the
wrong time. What's the best piece of work that you
think you've done? If they had to be carved on a
tombstone. That would be awfully hard to pin down.
As you know, Ron, my approach to astronomy has been
somewhat eclectic. I've done archaeoastronomy,
I've done rotation curves of galaxies, fiddled
with the gum nebula. I was the principal
investigator for the GHRS, which has contributed
to lots of disciplines. I have I helped found the
International Halley Watch. I helped start the
Solar Maximum Mission. Anything that I have done,
the more recent stuff that I'm doing right now, I'm
as proud of as anything. That is, I think we have
pinned down to within all a reasonable doubt what
the source of disconnection events in comets
might be. And the answer is? And the answer is
magnetic reconnection of sector boundaries,
which is what we proposed 15 years ago, but we
didn't have, that was a good speculation, we
didn't have the evidence to back it up. I think we
have the evidence now. But, you know, it's sort of
like asking somebody what their favorite child
is. I view whatever my contribution is to
astronomy to be in multiple areas, including
trying to run a NASA laboratory intelligently,
helping sell missions. I think 50 years from now,
stuff I did on the International Halley Watch may
be what I'm remembered by. I really don't know.
What was the most fun? Well, you
know, that is very hard to say, but I think selling
the GHRS because everybody told us as the Goddard
high resolution spectrograph on the Hubble Space
Telescope, everybody told us in 1976 and 1977 that
a proposal from a NASA lab didn't have a chance of a
snowball and you know where. And of course we were
category one and selected and it's up and working.
Again, when you want singles, you know, I'll tell
you stuff that I consider to be exciting and
productive, but it's hard to pin down. Did you ever
have any dead ends, misfires, things like that?
Sure, dead ends and misfires. I had the most
wonderful theory of the blue clearing on Mars.
That would be totally wrong. But it was a great
theory. What was it? Well, at that time there was
evidence, which we now know to be false, that the
solar wind might stop around 2 AU. And so we
postulated that it stopped, obviously, around
the orbit of Mars and that the eccentricity would
carry it in and out of this boundary. Absolutely
wonderful theory that had nothing to do with
reality. When did you first cross swords with an
ASA? Yeah, I wouldn't say that I have crossed
swords with NASA, although NASA might have an
alternate view.
Well, I was whilst at Kitt Peak involved with, I
think it was Mariner 4, with an experiment that
Charlie Barth was doing when he was still at JPL.
Now, I may have this a little garbled, because as
you know, that was 30 years ago. And something
happened, and we were all summarily tossed off the
mission, and it apparently bothered Charlie so
much that he moved to the University of Colorado,
where he was my director for five years. That was
probably it, my first one, but clearly when I
became a NASA employee and a NASA...
branch head and then a lab chief, it was a long
interaction for about 20 years. And I will say, it
was only towards the end that the cost-benefit
ratio went strongly unfavorable. In the 60s, if
you were in NASA and had good ideas and were willing
to work hard, you could get really neat things
done. Like we sold the SMM mission. Solar Maxwell
mission. Yeah, sorry. so we sold that and i think
it's been one of the most productive solar
missions around and then we uh... done with that
and we sold the goddard high resolution
spectrograph and uh... we helped start the hally
watch you know and you can go down the list but now
generally speaking even if you have a good idea and
you're willing to work hard it doesn't matter it's
not going to happen anyways uh... in general Do you
think NASA's handled planetary science good or
bad? Or average? Well, let's start with the
pluses, and then we'll try to draw a conclusion.
It's done a lot. I mean, we've had missions to
Mercury and Venus and Mars and Jupiter and Uranus,
Saturn, Neptune. So, you know, it's hard to fault
NASA The accomplishments, in my opinion, of the
NASA planet missions, you know, missions to the
moon, we've got rocks, you know, a whole bit. And
Mars Observer's on its way. It doesn't have any
significant problems that I know of. And
Galileo's on its way. It does have a significant
problem, but you can probably recoup a fair amount
of that. I've heard a number of people say that NASA
gets the pretty pictures and then cuts off the
money before the data is really properly examined
and published. Is that true? I think you can take
two views of that, and then let's try to decide
which is correct.
Certainly that tendency, and especially under
the new administrator, Daniel Golden, I think
there is even more than normal an inclination to
launch something and skim the cream and then
declare victory and go home. The old NASA motto
among the troops was build it, launch it, and
forget it. And I'm afraid we're going back to that.
Under the management that's been around for the
last 10 years or so, largely involving people like
Len Fisk, I think there was a tendency to
understand that when you built something like
this, that the risk part was in the building,
testing, and launching. And that the mission
part, so-called M-O-N-D-A in NASA parlance,
mission operations and data analysis, is the good
part, the cream skimming, the gravy. But
regrettably, I think we're going back to that. So I
think it is a real problem. The thought of turning
off things like Magellan I think sets a precedent
which I really don't even want to think about, but
it is almost surely going to happen. So I would say
that NASA, up until semi-recently, has improved
in that area over the early days, but now they seem
to be regressing backward into the old build,
launch, and forget syndrome. Where do you think
planetary astronomy would be today without NASA,
without the money that NASA's put into it? We
wouldn't even recognize it. You just, you know,
we've gone places and seen things that we just
absolutely could not do from Earth. We do a lot from
Earth, but having a mix of ground-based and space
and in situ and theory and all of the above, is the
way you make progress. Do you feel that people at
headquarters in the past and in the present really
understand what the troops in the field are doing?
Do they keep up with the science? I really don't
know how to answer that. I deal mostly now in my
astrophysical hat with Ed Weiler, who is very
knowledgeable about what's going on, and in my
planetary hat with Juergen Rahe, who I would say
the same thing. But they are in an environment
which is, I think, charitably fire drill
oriented. And whether they can spend enough time
to keep fully up to date, I don't know. But I think
they make a very good effort. Whether the top...
Remember, this is the discipline chief level. And
these people invariably are or were active
scientists. And I think they're... their ability
to keep up with what's going on is relatively good.
As you then go higher in the NASA hierarchy, where
frankly most of the decisions are made, I think the
organization tends to be out of touch with
anything outside the beltway. 30 years ago there
was just an American Astronomical Society. Now
there are all these sub-societies. And the first
one, I guess, was the Division for Planetary
Science. Has that been a good thing or a bad thing
for A, planetary astronomy, and B, astronomy in
general? I am one of the last holdouts against the
Planetary Division of Planetary Sciences. I only
joined last year. I believe that the division does
serve a useful purpose in bringing everybody
together, and I now religiously go to the
meetings, but I think it has also further helped to
drive the wedge between the planetary community
and the other community. They never did talk very
much to each other. No, but this sort of makes it
official.
Thirty years ago, Icarus was an obscure journal
publishing obscure papers by Bulgarians,
Austrian mechanics, and you've got to give Carl
Sagan credit. He really changed that around. Do
you happen to know who wrote the first paper in
Icarus? Well, you did. Yes, thank you. I'm talking
about the majority of papers, all right? It turns
out that paper was wrong, incidentally, which
came to a shock to Joe Burns. Do you think the rise of
Icarus has been a good thing? I mean, we don't see
planetary papers in the APJ anymore, not that we
saw a lot of them. Well, I still publish some of my
planetary papers in APJ. and I published some in
ICRIS, and I published some in AJA, and I plan to
publish some in ANA. As I described earlier, a lot
of this work I've been doing with DEs and the Halley
data has all come to fruition, so there's a flock of
papers coming out. ANA is? Astronomy and
Astrophysics, the so-called European journal,
which is about international or anything. I think
ICRIS has been turned into a first-rate journal
Whether or not those papers would have been
published anywhere, somewhere else, I couldn't
possibly tell you. Take this meeting now. Do you
think the astronomers here, this is your personal
opinion again, that they look down on planetary
astronomy now? Is there a grudging acceptance? Is
there a wholehearted acceptance? I honestly
don't know. And that stems from not caring. Some
may. I'm sure there's some that do. But so what?
Here's a particular and a general question. The
particular one is, what's the reaction you get
from people you meet on the airplane when you tell
them you're an astronomer? Oh, that's easy. When I
tell them I'm an astronomer, it's wonderful. When
I tell them I work on Hubble, it's not so wonderful.
And for the first year or so after the spherical
aberration was discovered, I did not volunteer
that information. Things have, the general
public perception has improved to the point where
I can now volunteer it without risking, you know,
three hours with the person next to you beating you
over the head verbally. What do you think the
public's general attitude towards planetary
astronomy and astronomy in general? I think the
public has fantastic support for the general
mission of astronomy in general and of NASA in
terms of exploration of space and orbiting
observatories in particular. I find that it's the
political process where the support tends to
weaken. But I give lots of public talks. I
personally figure I'm supported by public monies
and giving talks on my comment work on Hubble and
whatever else is part of the territory, and I find
tremendous reception. Do you think planetary
astronomers in particular and astronomers in
general have done as good a job as they could in
selling themselves to the public in Congress?
Undoubtedly not. No question.
On the other hand, Would you agree that there's
probably more realization now that, you know,
we're getting paid by the public and we've got to
tell them? Is that true? Would you go along with
that?
I doubt that, actually. I think in some levels that
is well perceived, but I continue to meet people
who regard their intellectual inquiry almost as a
divine right. Just give me the money and don't ask
questions. Exactly. I'm smart. I'm uncovering
the secrets of the universe. Send the check. How
good a job have we done with the Congress? We've
probably done even worse with the Congress. We
tend, like almost all segments of U.S. society, to
respond only to, at 1159 on a scale of 12 o'clock, to
impending disasters. When something that's near
and dear to our heart is about to be canceled, we
spring into action, but we don't do the homework
that would have prevented us from getting in that
situation in the first place? Well, we haven't
found life anywhere, any trace of evidence of life
anywhere in the solar system except what we know it
is on Earth. Do we? Well, we haven't found it yet.
What's the evidence part? Make good beer. All
right. Has that had any effect on funding and
public interest, the fact that, for example,
there are Martians?
I doubt it. You know, these are, quote, finding of
life, unquote, is such a long shot. I think most
people understand what the odds are. A lot of
people have gotten a lot of publicity and money, I
guess, lately, pushing topics like killer
asteroids, ozone holes, search for
extraterrestrial intelligence, other solar
systems. You think they're overdoing it?
Let me just comment on the killer asteroid
syndrome. Nothing that I personally know of
that's being done there is bad science. In fact,
there's a lot of good science there. And it's an
area that I have some interest. I am trying to get
modest funding to do searches for small comets. It
turns out that really is a different problem if you
read the space watch survey carefully. I believe,
however, that Congress is funding it for what they
believe to be the danger to Earth. And although
there clearly is a danger to Earth, I think that is
probably overblown. It probably won't do any harm
either.
What killed planetary, essentially killed
planetary astronomy early in the century? Was it
just Percival Lowell that we run out of? I really
don't know the answer to that question. Partly the
reason I don't like to put, first of all, don't
know, but even if I thought I did, a lot of these
things tend to go in cycles. And it's sort of like
education, you know, we use phonics and then it's
whatever and whatever and whatever. So I don't
take short-term fluctuations too seriously, and
I think under the last 20, 25 years with NASA and all
the way direct missions that planetary astronomy
may have gotten the lion's share of something, and
if it goes back the other way, so what? What's the
state of planetary astronomy today? Plus, minus,
zero? I still think it's a plus.
And keeping it a plus, in my view, depends on Three
things. Continued vitality at the young
investigator level. In other words, enough funds
to keep a crop of fresh blood, fresh ideas coming
into the field. The development, that's one. Two
is the development of good ground-based
capabilities for observations of planets. And
the third is keeping a reasonable semblance of the
space program going. Of the three, I worry most
about the last one, number three. But they're all
intertwined at a rather good level. And so even as
we speak, again, we have Galileo and Mars
Observer. And so my big question is, where is the
next planetary mission coming from? Will it be the
Discovery series? Will it be a larger mission?
Whatever. In the last 30 years since NASI got into
business, the taxpayers have spent a lot of money
on planetary astronomy. What do you think they've
gotten back from it? I think they've got a lot of
excitement. I frankly think that that money,
generally speaking, has been well spent and that
enough has come of it that is straightforward and
reasonably simple to understand. You don't need
to be... a professional astronomer to look at an
image of a planet at a new resolution or a new
wavelength and see there's brand new stuff going
on there. I find that, again, when I talk to people
in a public-type, you know, the Kiwanis Club, ARP
is one of my, they're desperate always for
programs where I live, so they keep calling me up,
that the people appreciate what is being done. I
don't think that when people hear that the NASA
budget is 1% of the federal budget, that they
consider that . Most people think it's 10% or 15%,
incidentally, which is not true. But again,
perception is the problem here. Let's get a
particular case now. The University of Colorado
doesn't have any conservatory or anything.
Again, I'm asking questions that you know I know
some of the answers to. But how did space science
and planetary astronomy get going at Colorado?
Space science had a really long tradition
starting right after World War II with what was
then the physics department and people like Bill
Rentsch. doing spectroscopy of first the sun and
other solar system objects from rockets. And this
has gone on through the years, and I think one of the
other important things was Charlie Barth coming
to the University of Colorado. It has then been
formulated as a goal of the university to be one of
the preeminent centers of space research in the
country. So I think it started right after World
War II with rockets, mostly launched from White
Sands. And then it has developed into the more
ambitious programs, the missions to planets. And
one of the major OSO 8 experiments was at the
University of Colorado.
So I think that pretty much does it. Now, of course,
we're a major. force in the industry. We have a
major new building where we build the
instruments. And one of our new instruments is one
Larry Esposito is building for Cassini. Mission
to Saturn. Study the rings and everything else. So
he's standing pretty good with the
administration. Not sure what that means. We win
our share of the competitions, which is the way all
these things are selected. And we have areas of
world-recognized expertise, detectors,
systems, et cetera. Just out of curiosity, what
percentage of undergrad students are getting the
exposure to astronomy? I can't, well, first you
have to define that. There is an undergraduate,
you know, astronomy one type course. And that has
hundreds of people. So there's some fraction that
way. For a long time, there was a satellite called
SME, the Solar Mesospheric Explorer, where
undergraduates could actually go in and learn how
to operate a spacecraft. And for a long time, we
were the only university that was operating their
own spacecraft, and we did it. with the proper
supervision, but literally with undergraduate
students. And the University of Colorado has also
had a fair number of people go on into the astronaut
corps. Alan Shepard and there are others. I don't
want to start down the list because I'll surely
forget one, but there's a bunch. people are still
churning out grad students in space sciences and
planetary astronomy and regular astronomy. When
is that going to stop or is it? Well, all economic
systems are self-correcting. I try to be fairly
candid with my students about what their job
chances are and they're not, I tell them, they're
not what they used to be. Some of these people have
almost built in things like one of my Very best
graduate students is from Korea. He wants to go
back to Korea. He'll get a job in Korea because he
has a prestigious education and all that kind of
thing. But that's long ago. This was probably 20
years ago when I was doing some teaching at the
University of Maryland. While I was at Goddard, I
had an adjoint professorship at Maryland. And
Gart Westerhout used to give the incoming
students a little sheet of paper that said, okay,
here you are. We'll be happy to educate you, but you
really ought to know that you might not get a job
studying cosmology at Mount Wilson and Palomar
Observatories. You might wind up teaching in a
small college or working for ibm or csc or you know
something like that i think a lot of people are
being honest about it a lot of students students
that are come into graduate school or an age
they're not always amenable to that kind of advice
and to put it mildly and you can't do anything about
that but i believe if you're honest up front you're
okay Do you think planetary astronomy is kind of
mined out in regards to big discoveries?
Nonsense. Professor Ari was not correct 100 years
ago. No, it was not. Because that's something
that... Several people have mentioned this.
Well, you know, we now know what the backside of the
moon looks like.
But there's no evidence of it. I think that's a very
basic lack of understanding of what intellectual
inquiry and knowledge are all about. The day we,
quote, know everything.
Between the colliding superconductor and the
space station, it's easy. Which one do you want?
pick the super colliding superconductor. That's
going to tell us something that we would actually
like to know rather than have WPA for the man
program or the people's program.
What happened in planetary astronomy? Well,
missions got more and more complex and more and
more expensive, and I guess Viking was the
ultimate one. And then what happened? Did the
money just dry up? Or did people say, wait a minute,
the next mission is going to cost the gross
national product? Or what actually happened?
Hard to say in detail, but due to human nature,
everything tends to escalate in expense and
complexity.
Toyotas and Nissans or Datsuns, as they were then
called 10 years ago, were at the low end of the
curve. And they kept creeping up and creeping up in
the same same human tendency works in missions and
if a three or four hundred million dollar mission
was great well how about a two billion one that one
ought to be really fantastic and of course you
reach some kind of law of diminishing returns
where the increment in knowledge is not
necessarily proportional to the increment in
cost to put it as delicately as possible so that
coupled with the fact that i am virtually sure that
people in the NASA hierarchy are rewarded by the
size of their missions or the amount of the budget
that they control. You have a built-in escalation
mechanism, and I think we see that in everything
that we do. And partly it's a technological
advance. We know how to do things better. We don't
want to do it the same way we did it 15 or 20 years ago.
And partially it's the tendency towards
complexity and bureaucracy and all the other
little nummies that we have come to love and know.
Now let's go back to the late unpleasantness at the
Yerkes Observatory. You may have been safely out
of there, but I recall I spent a summer up there and
people like you and Marnie Heiser were telling
people, don't come here to grad school. We're
stuck here. We've got to finish it out. And that
place was, as far as I know, famous for its
infighting and everything. And eventually it got
Kuiper canned, so I understand. Is that true, do
you know? It's true to the best of my knowledge that
there was a revolt and a no-confidence vote and all
that kind of thing. As a student there, I don't
remember it quite as bad. I mean, we knew the
fighting was going on, but it didn't actually
affect us all that much in retrospect. And I am
perfectly happy with the education that I got
there. But there's no question it could get a
little hairy. You left before Kuiper was ousted.
No, Kuiper left between my third and fourth years
there. Which would be? 1959.
And that's when LPL was founded in Tucson. But when
I left, Morgan was acting director. which was a fun
thing in and of itself. But Corker had already
gone. Actually, only a few people survived that
three or four year period in there. Well, remember
that when I first went there, Bengt Stromgren was
director. And I don't know what happened to him. I
don't know whether he was pushed or shoved. It
doesn't matter. He said, fine, I'm going back to my
professorship as Carlsberg professor at at the
observatory in Denmark, which I now cannot
remember the name of. It's a famous observatory.
Yeah, it's in Copenhagen. Yeah, if any of us says
the name, we'll know what it is. And I was told,
don't have actual proof, but repeatedly told that
the Carlsberg Brewery put major funding into
there, which, hey, we can handle that. And then
Kuiper was director for a year or two. I don't know
whether it was one or two. I don't know, I don't
remember whether Strump was one or two years in.
Morgan was, I think, acting director the last
year. I've heard from a number of people that there
were a lot of people saying things like studying
the solar system is a waste of time. We should be
doing real astronomy. Well, there were a lot. In
fairness, not only did Joe Chamberlain do solar
system work, but so did Kuiper.
Kuiper was a hell of a smart man. People tend to
forget that because his personality was a little
rough. But he was very innovative. His studies of
what we now call the Kuiper-Duncan belt were 30, 35
years, 40 years ahead of their time, whatever the
number is. And I think it's a tendency to
underestimate his abilities and contributions,
which I think is wrong. Do you remember when Aiden
Minel left? We had zero overlap at Yerkes, so I
don't know when that was. And Joe Chamberlain? Joe
Chamberlain was still at Yerkes when I left, and
two years later, two and a half years later, he took
the job as associate director of the space
division at Kitt Peak, and I joined him at Kitt Peak
for three years.